A template is a C++ entity that defines one of the following: 

  * a family of classes ([class template](class_template.html "cpp/language/class template")), which may be [nested classes](member_template.html "cpp/language/member template")
  * a family of functions ([function template](function_template.html "cpp/language/function template")), which may be [member functions](member_template.html "cpp/language/member template")



  * an alias to a family of types ([alias template](type_alias.html "cpp/language/type alias")) 

| (since C++11)  
---|---  
  
  * a family of variables ([variable template](variable_template.html "cpp/language/variable template")) 

| (since C++14)  
---|---  
  
  * a concept ([constraints and concepts](constraints.html "cpp/language/constraints")) 

| (since C++20)  
---|---  
  
Templates are parameterized by one or more [template parameters](template_parameters.html "cpp/language/template parameters"), of three kinds: type template parameters, constant template parameters, and template template parameters. 

When template arguments are provided, or, for [function](function_template.html#Template_argument_deduction "cpp/language/function template") and [class](ctad.html "cpp/language/class template argument deduction")(since C++17) templates only, deduced, they are substituted for the template parameters to obtain a _specialization_ of the template, that is, a specific type or a specific function lvalue. 

Specializations may also be provided explicitly: [full specializations](template_specialization.html "cpp/language/template specialization") are allowed for class, variable(since C++14) and function templates, [partial specializations](partial_specialization.html "cpp/language/partial specialization") are only allowed for class templates and variable templates(since C++14). 

When a class template specialization is referenced in context that requires a complete object type, or when a function template specialization is referenced in context that requires a function definition to exist, the template is _instantiated_ (the code for it is actually compiled), unless the template was already explicitly specialized or explicitly instantiated. Instantiation of a class template does not instantiate any of its member functions unless they are also used. At link time, identical instantiations generated by different translation units are merged. 

The definition of a class template must be visible at the point of implicit instantiation, which is why template libraries typically provide all template definitions in the headers (e.g., [most boost libraries are header-only](https://www.boost.org/doc/libs/release/more/getting_started/unix-variants.html#header-only-libraries)). 

## Contents

  * [1 Syntax](templates.html#Syntax)
  * [2 Template identifiers](templates.html#Template_identifiers)
  * [3 Templated entity](templates.html#Templated_entity)
  * [4 Keywords](templates.html#Keywords)
  * [5 Defect reports](templates.html#Defect_reports)
  * [6 See also](templates.html#See_also)

  
---  
  
### Syntax  
  
---  
`**template <**`parameter-list ﻿`**>**` requires-clause ﻿(optional) declaration |  (1)  |   
`**export template <**`parameter-list ﻿`**>**` declaration |  (2)  |  (until C++11)  
`**template <**`parameter-list ﻿`**> concept**` concept-name `**=**` constraint-expression ﻿`**;**` |  (3)  |  (since C++20)  
parameter-list |  \-  |  a non-empty comma-separated list of the [template parameters](template_parameters.html "cpp/language/template parameters"), each of which is either [constant parameter](template_parameters.html#Constant_template_parameter "cpp/language/template parameters"), a [type parameter](template_parameters.html#Type_template_parameter "cpp/language/template parameters"), a [template parameter](template_parameters.html#Template_template_parameter "cpp/language/template parameters"), or a [parameter pack](parameter_pack.html "cpp/language/parameter pack") of any of those(since C++11).   
---|---|---  
requires-clause |  \-  |  (since C++20) a [requires-clause](constraints.html#requires_clauses "cpp/language/constraints") that specifies the [constraints](constraints.html "cpp/language/constraints") on the template arguments.   
declaration |  \-  |  declaration of a [class (including struct and union)](class_template.html "cpp/language/class template"), a [member class or member enumeration type](member_template.html "cpp/language/member template"), a [function](function_template.html "cpp/language/function template") or [member function](member_template.html "cpp/language/member template"), a static data member at namespace scope[, a variable or static data member at class scope](variable_template.html "cpp/language/variable template")(since C++14), or an [alias template](type_alias.html "cpp/language/type alias")(since C++11). It may also define a [template specialization](template_specialization.html "cpp/language/template specialization").   
concept-name  
constraint-expression |  \-  |  see [constraints and concepts](constraints.html "cpp/language/constraints")  
export was an optional modifier which declared the template as _exported_ (when used with a class template, it declared all of its members exported as well). Files that instantiated exported templates did not need to include their definitions: the declaration was sufficient. Implementations of export were rare and disagreed with each other on details.  | (until C++11)  
---|---  
| This section is incomplete  
Reason: core syntax, template parameters, and instantiations, take content common between class_template and function_template   
---|---  
  
### Template identifiers

A template identifier has one of the following syntaxes:   
  
---  
template-name ﻿`**<**` template-argument-list ﻿(optional)`**>**` |  (1)  |   
`**operator**` op ﻿`**<**` template-argument-list ﻿(optional)`**>**` |  (2)  |   
`**operator ""**` identifier `**<**` template-argument-list ﻿(optional)`**>**` |  (3)  |  (since C++11)  
(deprecated)  
`**operator**` user-defined-string-literal `**<**` template-argument-list ﻿(optional)`**>**` |  (4)  |  (since C++11)  
  
1) A _simple template identifier_.

2) An operator function template identifier.

3,4) A [literal operator](user_literal.html#Literal_operators "cpp/language/user literal") function template identifier.

template-name |  \-  |  an [identifier](name.html "cpp/language/identifiers") that names a template   
---|---|---  
op |  \-  |  an [overloadable operator](operators.html "cpp/language/operators")  
identifier |  \-  |  an identifier   
user-defined-string-literal |  \-  |  "" followed by an identifier   
  
  
A simple template identifier that names a class template specialization names a class. 

A template identifier that names an alias template specialization names a type. 

A template identifier that names a function template specialization names a function. 

If all following conditions are satisfied, a template identifier is _valid_ ﻿: 

  * There are at most as many arguments as there are parameters or a parameter is a template [parameter pack](parameter_pack.html "cpp/language/parameter pack")(since C++11). 
  * There is an argument for each non-deducible non-pack(since C++11) parameter that does not have a default template argument. 
  * Each template argument matches the corresponding template parameter. 
  * Substitution of each template argument into the following template parameters (if any) succeeds. 



  * If the template identifier is [non-dependent](dependent_name.html "cpp/language/dependent name"), the associated constraints are satisfied as specified below. 

| (since C++20)  
---|---  
  
An invalid simple template id is a compile-time error, unless it names a function template specialization (in which case [SFINAE](sfinae.html "cpp/language/sfinae") may apply). 
    
    
    template<class T, T::type n = 0>
    class X;
     
    struct S
    {
        using type = int;
    };
     
    using T1 = X<S, int, int>; // error: too many arguments
    using T2 = X<>;            // error: no default argument for first template parameter
    using T3 = X<1>;           // error: value 1 does not match type-parameter
    using T4 = X<int>;         // error: substitution failure for second template parameter
    using T5 = X<S>;           // OK

When the template-name of a simple template id names a constrained non-function template or a constrained template template parameter, but not a member template that is a member of an unknown specialization, and all template arguments in the simple template id are non-dependent, the associated constraints of the constrained template must be satisfied: 
    
    
    template<typename T>
    concept C1 = sizeof(T) != sizeof(int);
     
    template<C1 T>
    struct S1 {};
     
    template<C1 T>
    using Ptr = T*;
     
    S1<int>* p;                      // error: constraints not satisfied
    Ptr<int> p;                      // error: constraints not satisfied
     
    template<typename T>
    struct S2 { Ptr<int> x; };       // error, no diagnostic required
     
    template<typename T>
    struct S3 { Ptr<T> x; };         // OK, satisfaction is not required
     
    S3<int> x;                       // error: constraints not satisfied
     
    template<template<C1 T> class X>
    struct S4
    {
        X<int> x;                    // error, no diagnostic required
    };
     
    template<typename T>
    concept C2 = sizeof(T) == 1;
     
    template<C2 T> struct S {};
     
    template struct S<char[2]>;      // error: constraints not satisfied
    template<> struct S<char[2]> {}; // error: constraints not satisfied

| (since C++20)  
---|---  
  
If all following conditions are satisfied, two template identifiers are _same_ ﻿: 

  * Their template-name ﻿s or operators refer to the same template. 
  * Their corresponding type template arguments are the same type. 
  * The template parameter values determined by their corresponding constant template arguments are [template-argument-equivalent](template_parameters.html#Template_argument_equivalence "cpp/language/template parameters"). 
  * Their corresponding template template arguments refer to the same template. 



Two template identifier that are the same refer to the same variable,(since C++14) class, or function. 

### Templated entity

A _templated entity_ (or, in some sources, "temploid") is any entity that is defined (or, for a [lambda expression](lambda.html "cpp/language/lambda"), created)(since C++11) within a template definition. All of the following are templated entities: 

  * a class/function/variable(since C++14) template 



  * a [concept](constraints.html "cpp/language/constraints")

| (since C++20)  
---|---  
  
  * a member of a templated entity (such as a non-template member function of a class template) 
  * an enumerator of an enumeration that is a templated entity 
  * any entity defined or created within a templated entity: a local class, a local variable, a friend function, etc 



  * the closure type of a lambda expression that appears in the declaration of a templated entity 

| (since C++11)  
---|---  
  
For example, in 
    
    
    template<typename T>
    struct A
    {
        void f() {}
    };

the function `A::f` is not a function template, but is still considered to be templated. 

  
A _templated function_ is a function template or a function that is templated. 

A _templated class_ is a class template or a class that is templated. 

A _templated variable_ is a variable template or a variable that is templated.  | (since C++14)  
---|---  
  
### Keywords

[`template`](../keyword/template.html "cpp/keyword/template"), [`export`](../keyword/export.html "cpp/keyword/export")

### Defect reports

The following behavior-changing defect reports were applied retroactively to previously published C++ standards. 

DR  | Applied to  | Behavior as published  | Correct behavior   
---|---|---|---  
[CWG 2293](https://cplusplus.github.io/CWG/issues/2293.html) | C++98  | the rules of determining whether a template  
identifier is valid were not provided  | provided   
[CWG 2682](https://cplusplus.github.io/CWG/issues/2682.html) | C++98  
C++14  | the definitions of templated function/template class  
(C++98)/templated variable (C++14) were missing  | added   
[P2308R1](https://wg21.link/P2308R1) | C++98  | two template identifiers were different if their  
corresponding constant template arguments  
are not template-argument-equivalent  | they are different if their corresponding  
constant template parameter values  
are not template-argument-equivalent   
  
### See also

[C documentation](../../c/language/generic.html "c/language/generic") for Generic selection  
---
